Granularity is defined by what exactly is being measured in a dataset,
or basically what does each row in a table represent?
A table could be measuring Individual Sales,
a table could be measuring Individual Orders which constitutes a multiple sales,
or table could be measuring
Individual Products with metadata about each product incitement.
As you start out your analyses,
you should immediately find out how many rows are there.
This would help you determine if the size of the dataset falls within your expectations.
If it's too small,
we may be missing certain slices of data in the dataset,
and we'll need to find out what they are.
If it's too large,
it may have extra data that we won't need,
and we'd have to filter it out from our analyses.
Size also matters if the data is way too big
to efficiently query with your infrastructure at hand,
whether it's a data visualization tool or a SQL database.
You'll need to find out the primary key in your dataset.
The primary key is what will help you determine what the table is measuring and
will also likely be the field that you'll use to join with other tables.
The primary key is a unique value for each row in your dataset.
There should not be any duplicate values if you
compare your primary key across different rows.
The primary key could be one field or a concatenated combination of fields.
This means that the total number of unique values in
your primary key should match the total number of rows in the table.
Hence, if you run a SELECT count distinct SQL statement on your suspected primary key,
it should match the value if you run SELECT count star on the dataset.
You can also just run a describe command on the table to determine the primary key,
but only if it were specified by the creators of the table during schema creation.
The syntax for this varies amongst different relational databases.
For example, its d table_name for PostgreSQL and DESCRIBE table_name for MySQL.